Voltage Scaling of Graphene Device on SrTiO3 Epitaxial Thin Film

Electrical transport in monolayer graphene on SrTiO3 (STO) thin film is examined in order to promote gate-voltage scaling using a high-k dielectric material. The atomically flat surface of thin STO layer epitaxially grown on Nb-doped STO single-crystal substrate offers good adhesion between the high-k film and graphene, resulting in nonhysteretic conductance as a function of gate voltage at all temperatures down to 2 K. The two-terminal conductance quantization under magnetic fields corresponding to quantum Hall states survives up to 200 K at a magnetic field of 14 T. In addition, the substantial shift of charge neutrality point in graphene seems to correlate with the temperature-dependent dielectric constant of the STO thin film, and its effective dielectric properties could be deduced from the universality of quantum phenomena in graphene. Our experimental data prove that the operating voltage reduction can be successfully realized due to the underlying high-k STO thin film, without any noticeable degradation of graphene device performance.

Eutectic Growth in Two-Phase Multicomponent Alloys

A theory of two-phase eutectic growth for a multicomponent alloy is presented. This theory employs the thermodynamic equilibrium at the solid/liquid interface and thus makes it possible to use standard CALPHAD databases to determine the effects of multicomponent phase equilibrium on eutectic growth. Using the same hypotheses as the Jackson Hunt theory, we find that the growth law determined for binary alloys in the Jackson Hunt theory can be generalized to systems with N elements. In particular, a new model is derived from this theory for ternary two-phase eutectics. The use of this model to predict the eutectic microstructure of systems is discussed.


Short-range phase coherence and origin of the 1T-TiSe2 charge density wave

The impact of variable Ti self-doping on the 1T-TiSe2 charge density wave (CDW) is studied by scanning tunneling microscopy. Supported by density functional theory we show that agglomeration of intercalated-Ti atoms acts as preferential nucleation centers for the CDW that breaks up in phaseshifted CDW domains whose size directly depends on the intercalated-Ti concentration and which are separated by atomically-sharp phase boundaries. The close relationship between the diminution of the CDW domain size and the disappearance of the anomalous peak in the temperature dependent resistivity allows to draw a coherent picture of the 1T-TiSe2 CDW phase transition and its relation to excitons.